Section 4 — Vim and Nano
Q1. Difference between vim and nano?
vim (Vi IMproved): Powerful, modal editor with normal/insert/command modes. Steep learning curve but extremely fast and powerful once
mastered. Available on almost every Linux server. Supports advanced features like macros, split windows, plugins. nano: Simple
beginner-friendly editor. No modes — what you type goes directly into the file. Shows keyboard shortcuts at the bottom of screen. Easier to use
but less powerful. In DevOps: vim is preferred on production servers as it is always available. nano is better for beginners or quick edits.
Q2. What are vim modes?
Vim has three main modes: 1. Normal Mode (default): The mode when you first open vim. You cannot type text. Used for navigation, copying,
deleting and running commands. Press Esc to return here from any mode. 2. Insert Mode: Press i to enter. The -- INSERT -- indicator appears
at the bottom. Now you can type and edit text freely. Press Esc to exit back to normal mode. 3. Command Mode: From normal mode press :
(colon). Used for saving, quitting, search/replace and other operations. Examples: :wq to save and quit, :q! to quit without saving.
Q3. How do you save and quit in vim?
Save and quit: :wq (write and quit) or :x (same as :wq). Quit without saving: :q! (the ! forces quit ignoring unsaved changes). Save without
quitting: :w (write to file and stay in vim). Quit if no changes: :q (only works if file has no unsaved changes). The most important ones to
memorise: :wq saves and exits, :q! discards changes and exits. Always press Escape first before typing : to ensure you are in normal mode.
Esc # ensure in normal mode first :wq # save and quit :q! # quit WITHOUT saving :w # save only
Q4. How to search text in vim?
In normal mode type /word to search forward for that word. Press n to jump to the next match and N to go to previous match. Type ?word to
search backward through the file. To replace all occurrences: :%s/oldword/newword/g where % means whole file, s means substitute, g means
global (all occurrences). To replace with confirmation: :%s/oldword/newword/gc (the c asks for confirmation before each replacement).
/searchterm # search forward ?searchterm # search backward n # next match N # previous match :%s/old/new/g
# replace all
Q5. How to copy and paste in vim?
In normal mode: yy copies the current line (yank yank). y followed by a number copies multiple lines — 3yy copies 3 lines. dd cuts (deletes) the
current line. p pastes after the cursor position. P pastes before the cursor position. To copy a word: yw. To copy to end of line: y$. These
operations work with the internal vim clipboard. For copying between vim and the system clipboard, use +y or *y depending on the system.
yy # copy current line 3yy # copy 3 lines dd # cut current line p # paste after cursor P # paste before
cursor
Q6. What is insert mode in vim?
Insert mode is the mode in vim where you can actually type and edit text. By default vim opens in normal mode where keypresses are
commands not text. You enter insert mode by pressing i (insert before cursor), I (insert at beginning of line), a (append after cursor), A (append
at end of line), o (open new line below), O (open new line above). The -- INSERT -- indicator appears at the bottom of the screen. Press
Escape to exit insert mode and return to normal mode.
Q7. How do you undo and redo in vim?
In normal mode: u undoes the last change. Pressing u multiple times undoes multiple changes step by step. Ctrl+r redoes a change that was
undone. U undoes all changes on the current line. In DevOps: essential to know when you accidentally delete or overwrite content in a config
file. vim has a deep undo history so you can undo many levels of changes.
u # undo last change Ctrl + r # redo U # undo all changes on current line
Q8. How to open a file using nano?
To open or create a file with nano: nano filename.txt. If the file exists it opens it for editing. If it does not exist nano creates a new empty file with
that name. You can also open with line number: nano +15 filename.txt opens at line 15. nano opens immediately in editing mode unlike vim —
you can start typing right away. The bottom of the screen shows available keyboard shortcuts with ^ meaning Ctrl.
Q9. How to save and exit nano?
Save in nano: Ctrl+O (WriteOut) then press Enter to confirm the filename. Exit nano: Ctrl+X. If you have unsaved changes nano asks if you
want to save — press Y for yes, N for no. Save and exit together: press Ctrl+X and when asked to save press Y then Enter. Other useful
shortcuts: Ctrl+G for help, Ctrl+K to cut a line, Ctrl+U to paste, Ctrl+W to search for text.
Q10. When do you prefer vim over nano?

Prefer vim when: working on servers where nano is not installed (vim/vi is almost always available), performing complex edits with search and
replace across large files, comparing two files side by side with vimdiff, editing multiple files simultaneously, working remotely via SSH where
vim is standard. Prefer nano when: quick simple edits, beginners who are not yet comfortable with vim modes, editing a single file with no
complex operations needed. In DevOps interviews vim knowledge is expected.
